Add ADR implementation reference (#418)
TheThingsIndustries/lorawan-stack-docs: doc/content/reference/adr/_index.md

description: ""
---

Adaptive Data Rate (ADR) is a mechanism for optimizing data rates, airtime and energy consumption in the network.

This reference documents how ADR is implemented in {{% tts %}}.

<!--more-->

## How ADR Works

The ADR mechanism controls the following transmission parameters of an end device:

- Spreading factor
- Bandwidth
- Transmission power

See [The Things Network Learn](https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/docs/lorawan/adaptive-data-rate/) for a general description of ADR.

## The Things Stack ADR Algorithm

This section describes {{% tts %}} ADR implementation in plain english, with links to the relevant lines of source code in our open source [LoRaWAN Stack Repository](https://github.com/TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack).

{{% tts %}} ADR implementation looks at the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) to determine the Data Rate and Tx Power, and looks at frame counters to determine packet loss, and set the number of re-transmissions accordingly.

The implementation is based on Semtech's recommended algorithm described in [this document](https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum/uploads/default/original/2X/7/7480e044aa93a54a910dab8ef0adfb5f515d14a1.pdf):

> 1. Determine [the maximum SNR over recent transmissions](https://github.com/TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack/blob/v3.13/pkg/networkserver/mac/adr.go#L218)

Reviewer: https://github.com/TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack/blob/5a816e8171f993db9659566286d45725698f032e/pkg/networkserver/mac/adr.go#L218

> 2. Determine [the minimum SNR to demodulate an uplink given the current parameters](https://github.com/TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack/blob/v3.13/pkg/networkserver/mac/adr.go#L232)

Reviewer: https://github.com/TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack/blob/5a816e8171f993db9659566286d45725698f032e/pkg/networkserver/mac/adr.go#L232

> 3. Calculate [the margin to further optimize the data rate](https://github.com/TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack/blob/v3.13/pkg/networkserver/mac/adr.go#L236)

Reviewer: https://github.com/TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack/blob/5a816e8171f993db9659566286d45725698f032e/pkg/networkserver/mac/adr.go#L236

  - Part of this is configurable per device (if you use the CLI)

>   - If less measurements (uplinks) are available than necessary, [include a safety margin](https://github.com/TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack/blob/v3.13/pkg/networkserver/mac/adr.go#L238-L240)

Reviewer: https://github.com/TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack/blob/5a816e8171f993db9659566286d45725698f032e/pkg/networkserver/mac/adr.go#L238-L240

> 4. [Increase the data rate as long as there's enough margin](https://github.com/TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack/blob/v3.13/pkg/networkserver/mac/adr.go#L251-L262)

Reviewer: https://github.com/TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack/blob/5a816e8171f993db9659566286d45725698f032e/pkg/networkserver/mac/adr.go#L251-L262

> 4. [Increase the data rate as long as there's enough margin](https://github.com/TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack/blob/v3.13/pkg/networkserver/mac/adr.go#L251-L262)
> 5. If there's still margin after reaching the maximum data rate, [decrease the transmit power](https://github.com/TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack/blob/v3.13/pkg/networkserver/mac/adr.go#L273-L281)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. [Increase the data rate as long as there is enough margin](https://github.com/TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack/blob/v3.13/pkg/networkserver/mac/adr.go#L251-L262)
5. If there is still margin after reaching the maximum data rate, [decrease the transmit power](https://github.com/TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack/blob/v3.13/pkg/networkserver/mac/adr.go#L273-L281)
```

Reviewer: https://github.com/TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack/blob/5a816e8171f993db9659566286d45725698f032e/pkg/networkserver/mac/adr.go#L273-L281

> 6. Depending on packet loss, [increase the number of retransmissions](https://github.com/TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack/blob/v3.13/pkg/networkserver/mac/adr.go#L288-L296)

Reviewer: https://github.com/TheThingsNetwork/lorawan-stack/blob/5a816e8171f993db9659566286d45725698f032e/pkg/networkserver/mac/adr.go#L288-L296
